 PROJECT: Data Modelling with Postgres
 ===========================================
 > By Bharti Parekh 27 April 2020
 >
 ***
 
 ### Introduction
 
   A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.
Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis.

### Project Description
***
In this project, I applied what I've learned on data modeling with Postgres and built an ETL pipeline using Python. To complete the project, I needed to define fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and wrote an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.

### Dataset 
***
#####  Song Dataset : 
Songs dataset is a subset of [Million Song Dataset](https://labrosa.ee.columbia.edu/millionsong/) Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. all json files are nested in subdirectories under /data/song_data. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset:
```sh
song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json
```

##### Log dataset:
Log datasets: The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.

The log files in the dataset I was working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset:
```sh
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json
```

### Database Schema

**Schema for Song Play Analysis** :
Using the song and log datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.one fact table: songplays, and
four dimension tables: users, songs, artists and time.

**Fact Table**
1. songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent


**Dimension Tables** 
1. **users** - users in the app
   user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
2. **songs** - songs in music database
   song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
3. **artists** - artists in music database
   artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
4. **time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
   start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday


### Project structure
***

Files used on the project:
1.  **data** folder nested at the home of the project, where all needed jsons reside.
2.  **sql_queries.py** contains all your sql queries, and is imported into the files bellow.
3. **create_tables.py** drops and creates tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL      scripts.
4. **test.ipynb** displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.
5. **etl.ipynb** reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into your tables.
6. **etl.py**   reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into your tables.
7. **README.md**  current file, provides discussion about project.

### ETL Pipeline

***

Extract, transform, load (ETL) is the general procedure of copying data from one or more sources into a destination system which represents the data differently from, or in a different context than, the sources.
The ETL pipeline extracts data from files in two directories:
```sh
1. /data/log_data 
2. /data/song_data
```
##### Steps for Project Process :

1.  Wrote DROP, CREATE and INSERT query statements in **sql_queries.py**, which contains all SQL queries and  is imported       into    **create_tables.py**.
2. Running the **create_tables.py** script in a terminal creates and initializes the tables for the sparkifydb database. 
3. Running **test.ipynb** in a Jupyter notebook confirms that the tables were successfully created with the correct columns.
4. Running the notebook **etl.ipynb** develops the ETL processes for each table and is used to prepare a python script for        processing all the datasets.
5.  In a terminal, the python   **etl.py**  script is run to process the all the datasets. The script connects to the Sparkify    database, extracts and processes the **log_data**     and  **song_data**, and loads data into the five tables. The file      **sql_queries.p**y contains all SQL queries and is imported into   **etl.py**.
6. Again, running **test.ipynb** confirms that the records were successfully inserted into each table.

After this is all done, our Postgres database is finally modeled and ready to be queried!.
#### Sample Queries

to view rows that appear on all 5 tables:
```sh
%sql SELECT * \
FROM songplays JOIN songs ON songplays.song_id = songs.song_id \
JOIN artists ON songplays.artist_id = artists.artist_id \
JOIN time ON songplays.start_time =  time.start_time \
JOIN users ON songplays.user_id = users.user_id \
LIMIT 5;
```